---
layout: narrative
title: The Chital
author: Anshul Samar
date: 2020-03-09
mydate: Mar 2020
---

“Rama told Lakhsmana to stay with Sita and then went to find the
golden deer.” Rishiji closed his book and looked at the two boys in
front of him. “We’ll stop here.”

Bhanu and Arnab stretched their legs, relieved, and began swatting the
air around them. Rishiji always had them sit in vajrasana after supper
and while they had done this for the last several months, they had yet
to sit perfectly still. Usually, Arnab’s knee would pain and Bhanu’s
leg would fall asleep. Worse, a couple flies had followed them out
from the kitchen and had found refuge in their ears.

The flies at the ashram seemed to have a remarkable knack for
distressing even the quietest monks. In fact, it was Bhanu’s
observation that the quietest monks were often the most easily
distressed. No matter how many layers of shawls they would cover
themselves in, the flies would manage to find some part of their face
that had yet to be covered.  Flies weren’t all that would bother them;
Bhanu, even at his young age of ten, was in charge of fielding their
complaints whenever Rishiji was away. Most recently, Tejas, a pundit
who would frequently visit the ashram, had stormed into Bhanu’s room,
face as red as the tilak on his forehead.  “Your rooster refuses to
listen to my multiple requests to start crowing only after my morning
meditation,” he chided. And while Bhanu assured him that he would take
the matter up with the rooster himself, he knew that it would be of
little use. As still as ashrams were supposed to be, Rishiji’s was
anything but quiet. And perhaps more importantly, Bhanu wasn’t really
sure how to converse with roosters.

“Any questions?” Rishiji stood, gathering his belongings from under
the banyan tree.  He stretched forward, with what was left of his
white hair dangling by his shoulders, and put his small copy of the
Ramayana in a grass woven bag. Bholu, the ashram dog, lifted its head
from the grass. It was nursing a small injury on its back leg, but got
up on its other three and started to sniff around for any prasad from
the afternoon puja. Rishiji smiled and looked towards Bhanu.

“Lord Rama is going to kill the deer,” Bhanu said, looking up, and
meeting Rishiji’s eyes. Bhanu, now no longer preoccupied with the
flies and his sleeping leg, was in deep thought. He had found a small
rock between the grass and was turning it over in his hand. “How is
this not sin, Rishiji? What happened to the vows of ahimsa we took –
didn’t Rama take them too?”

Rama never ceased to trouble Bhanu. Bhanu was startled when Rama left
King Dasharatha and Queen Kaikeyi without even considering his own
mother - couldn’t he have persuaded them to shorten exile? Why
couldn’t have Bharata and Rama ruled together? While Rishiji had found
these questions amusing, Arnab had grown annoyed of them. He was older
than Bhanu and had been at the ashram longer. He had heard these
stories once before and was restless to play on the grounds.

“It’s Maricha in disguise.” Arnab snorted. “It was a rakshasa, not a
real deer. Even Bholu could have sniffed him out.”

“I don’t know about that,” Rishiji chuckled. Bholu, in his youth,
could do many things - sit, rollover, and bark - but he was terrible
at using his nose. Once Rishiji had tried to train Bholu to retrieve
his shawl and Bholu instead returned with Tejas’ dhoti, and needless
to say, a very angry pundit.

“But couldn’t Rama have waited and talked to Maricha? Maybe Maricha
was upset?” Bhanu asked.

“It was Rama’s dharma to fight Maricha and kill him.” Arnab replied,
picking up a straw broom and wooden pan that was leaning besides the
tree.

“And Lakshmana’s dharma? Was it to do whatever Rama wanted?

Rishiji placed a hand on Bhanu’s shoulder.  “Let Lakshmana worry about
his duty and you worry about yours. Pick up any rubbish and come
inside, I’ll need help with the blankets.”

Bhanu took the pan and squatted on the ground, following Arnab as they
cleared wicks and mess from the evening puja. As soon as Rishiji was
out of sight, Arnab dropped the broom and ran off down the
hill. “There shouldn’t be any crumbs left!” he yelled. Bhanu sighed
and finished cleaning up, glancing sideways at Bholu who was in no
mood to help. Dogs, it seemed, were very clear about their
dharma. This one had two: taking rest and eating ladoos.

Evenings were Bhanu’s favorite time at the ashram. By dusk everything
had all settled down, as if the ashram had drawn itself into
samadhi. Rishiji had inherited this land from his father and while it
was not that large – Bhanu could see the perimeter from where he sat -
it was more than enough for anyone who wandered onto it. The center of
the land was a large meditation hall which was surrounded by a circle
of cottages made from mud and cow dung. In the evenings, the disciples
would retreat back to their rooms, hugging woolen shawls close to
their bodies. The kitchen would be locked - lest any stray chital
(spotted deer) or fox find its way in - but the meditation hall would
remain open. Outside of some outdoor pujas, the open hall was where
the most important ceremonies took place. It was where masters would
be greeted, seekers from neighboring villages would arrive, heavy with
their burdens, and where disciples would sing songs and meditate. And
by nighttime, save a lost chappal or two, it would be empty, welcoming
cooling air from the nearby lake and anyone in need of a roof. It was
the same air that filled Bhanu’s lungs, the same air that wafted
sandalwood agarbatti into the rooms, and the same air that brought
travelers back again and again. Rishiji would say that more than the
land, it was this air he loved so dearly, and that these cottages and
halls had simply been built within it.

Bhanu took one last look around the ashram and walked down the hill,
itching his back and arms. Mosquitos were perhaps the only thing that
he despised about the evening. Arnab would keep count of the number he
had killed, but Bhanu would do no such thing. His defense was blanket
and a quick prayer.

That night, Bhanu covered his full body with a blanket and drifted in
and out of sleep, thinking of how pleasant lakewater would be on his
bites and his conversation with Rishiji earlier that week. He had
followed Rishiji to the small opening by the shore where pundits were
washing their clothes against the rocks. “What is my dharma?” Bhanu
had asked.

“Does it matter?” Rishiji replied.

“It seems to change right from wrong,” Bhanu said. “If I refuse to
feed Bholu, it will die. But say it is destined to become rabid next
week?”

“Do not think so much,” Rishiji said. “Most of life is written. The
rest, moves in action.”

“Which part do we write?” Bhanu pressed.

Bhanu tossed, his legs were sore from the errands he had run earlier
that day. Tejas and a circle of visiting pundits in saffron robes had
called on him repeatedly while they sat discussing Vasishta. “Jai
Ramji ki!” they would say. “Can you bring us water?” Or, “Jai Ramji
ki! Can you bring us triphala?” “Take the name of Lord Rama 108
times,” the balding pundit had said, “and he will guide you.” The
others nodded in approval. “Right action comes from right intention
which manifests in deep silence.” They all shook their heads, some up
and down, others left to right, and others, as if performing neck
rotations. Bhanu couldn’t help but think that in simply accepting alms
and reciting, they were never in a situation where they had to apply
anything they read.

“Bhanu!” There was a loud thump. “Bhanu, get up!” Bhanu opened his
eyes and saw Arnab hanging over his head, with a fire in his eyes.

“Bhanu, get up!”

Bhanu sat up, rubbing his eyes. “What?”

“There’s a golden chital outside the meditation hall!”

He took off Bhanu’s blanket and shook him.

“Let’s go!” Arnab. “I need you to look out and help me.”

Bhanu’s eyes widened. “Bhaiya! There are often chital around the
ashram.”

“This one’s special, Bhanu, it’s spots are bright silver just like
Maricha’s. Let’s go.”

Of all the stories that Rishiji would share, it was the ones that
would involve the victory that would intrigue Arnab the most. From the
look in Arnab’s face, Bhanu understood that he had been planning this
adventure for days, knowing that sooner or later a deer would wander
into the grounds. While there was often talk of rakshasa in the
neighboring forests, whether this one was truly Maricha, or just bore
a resemblance, did not matter to Arnab. For Arnab, it was his chance
to fight in his own epic - one that he could not do without Bhanu’s
help. How sad, Bhanu thought, that the ancient tales and stories would
always leave out the suffering of action and conquest. Did pain
splinter Rama’s heart every time an arrow left his bow? Did confusion
churn Laxman’s stomach? Or perhaps the princes of Ayodhya ‘s were so
in tune with their dharma that they had nothing to be worried about at
all.

Arnab pushed Bhanu off the bed onto the mud floor. By the time Bhanu
stumbled outside, Arnab had already begun collecting stones, dropping
them in a bag by his waist.

“Why are we doing this?”

“It is our duty to kill rakshasa.”

“We don’t even know if it’s really a -”

Arnab turned around and raised a finger up to Bhanu’s face. “Pick up
your chappals and come.”

Bhanu stood up and followed Arnab out of the room. They stumbled along
the footpath towards the back of the ashram, where a thin fence
separated the larger forest from the meditation hall. From a distance
away, Bhanu could make out the outline of a chital. As he got closer,
he saw that it was a doe. It had light golden skin with white spots
that sparkled under the moonlight. It was no more than twenty thirty
steps away from the surrounding shrubs and had its neck lodged in the
fence. Bhanu could see no other deer, which was odd because Rishiji
had once commented that they traveled in groups. Perhaps it is a
seeker, Bhanu wondered, and wandered here in search for knowledge. “Go
back,” Bhanu whispered as Arnab checked to make sure it couldn’t
escape. “It’s better to be like your friends.”

“If we can dislodge its neck, then it will be free” Bhanu said.

“What would be the point of that?” Arnab retorted. “Keep your voice
down! And pass me the stones.” Arnab positioned himself twenty feet
away from the chital.

Bhanu stared at the chital’s face. It was trying to twist its neck
through the wooden plank, but kept getting caught on the upper post.

“What do you plan on doing?”

“Pass me the bag, Bhanu.”

Watching the chital, Bhanu bent down to pick the bag and tossed it to
Arnab. Arnab poured out all of the stones and started going through
them one by one, keeping only the ones that sharp or heavy. By this
time, the chital stopped trying to get itself loose. Some green vines
growing along the fence had caught its attention. It occurred to Bhanu
that the chital had forgotten that it was stuck. How sad, Bhanu
thought, to be so trapped and yet feel so free.

Arnab with now shifting his body to be slightly further from the
chital, feeling the stone in his hands. There was a look of
determination on his face. As the chital chewed on shrub, Arnab
reached into the bag for a stone and aimed.

The stone flew out of Arnab’s hand, hitting the chital on the bottom
of its hind leg. It jumped, breaking through the bottom plank, which
splintered into its skin. It quickly steadied itself and tried to
escape, but the rope Arnab had tied jerked it back.

Bhanu started to cry. “Why are you doing this?” The moon seemed to be
shining even more now and yet the darkness seemed stiller too, as if
the shadows had stopped moving to watch.

“Get out of the way Bhanu! Even Lord Rama hunted deer!”

“But it’s not a rakshas!”

“You have a duty, Bhanu - keep an eye out and stay shut!”

Arnab waited until the chital became still and raised his arm. The
chital’s neck rose up. Arnab threw. The chital jerked again.

“Please stop!”

Bhanu wiped his tears and moved forward, putting himself between the
chital and Arnab. Arnab’s face contorted. “What are you doing, Bhanu?”

“We cannot do this, how can we be doing this?”

Arnab eyes grew wide in anger. “Hunting is in our blood, Bhanu, not
reciting verses and picking up after pundits. Get out of my way!”

Bhanu’s heart was beating like a hummingbird. He crouched down by the
chital and keeping his head forward, tried to lift the fence out of
the way, but to no use. Arnab had managed to push the fence deeper
into the soil so Bhanu alone could not move it. The chital was no
longer trying to move and remained by the fence, taking heavy
breaths. Its eyes were big and wet, golden skin had mixed with
red. Bhanu saw Bholu approach and realized that it must have smelled
blood.

Bholu started to whimper. “Quiet!” Arnab threw a stone and it
scampered away, retreating to watch from a distance.

The lines on Arnab’s face grew sharper. The last time that Bhanu had
seen Arnab like this was a year prior when one of Arnab’s distant
relatives, a prince in a neighboring village, had arrived unannounced
at the ashram, and despite Rishiji’s caution, had taken the boys out
on a small hunting expedition. “It will be good for their character,”
the prince had said. “Characters are not made, they are remembered,”
Rishiji had replied. But the Prince wouldn’t hear any of it and rode
the boys out to a clearing in the forest. Arnab managed to corner a
small rabbit and lunged at it with a certain ferocity in his
face. This time, he wasn’t sure if he was a rabbit or the deer.


He walked a few steps closer to Bhanu and spit. He raised his foot to
kick Bhanu aside, but then paused, a sneer building on his face.

Arnab took a stone and placed it in Bhanu’s hand. He stepped back to
his previous position and looked down at Bhanu.

“If violence bothers you so much, then hit me with this and I won’t
lay a hand on the chital.”

Bhanu looked at the chital. He looked over at Bholu, trying to will it
to go and fetch Rishiji, Tejas, or anyone but it was too busy, its
mind already occupied with something else.
Arnab stared. “What is taking you so long? Get up!”

 Bhanu stood up, dusting some of the dirt off of his legs. He was
 breathing fast, the same air that  enveloped him at the top of the
 hill, was now entering and leaving his nostrils at its own accord. He
 felt the stone in his hands. It was surprisingly smooth as if carved
 from years of wear and tear, under the feet of princes and the bodies
 of men.

Arnab spit again, dragging dirt with his chappal over it and squashing
it down.

Bhanu looked squarely into Arnab’s eyes, turned stone over twice in
his hand, and raised his arm.

Arnab’s eyes widened as Bhanu threw.

For a moment, it seemed as if even the chital had paused and the
shadows and shrubs were all holding their breath. But the stone landed
with a thump near Bholu who got startled and barked again.

Arnab brought his arms down, momentarily confused by what had
happened, and found Bhanu now standing fully in front of the chital
with his arms outstretched to protect it.

Arnab sneered. “It will be your fault today that the chital dies, not
mine.”

“Then you will have to throw the stones through me,” replied Bhanu
softly. He breathed deeply as his heart quieted.

Arnab weighed the stone in his hand and slowly raised it to aim. The
bushes by the meditation hall shuffled and they could hear that the
commotion had woken someone up. In a few moments, Rishiji and Tejas
appeared from behind the pathway. Rishiji’s face glowed like the moon
and Tejas looked disgruntled is always.

“What is going on here, boys?” Rishiji amused face quickly settled
into a frown as he saw the chital tied to the fence. He rushed towards
the chital. He looked at the boys, first Bhanu, then Arnab.

Rishiji turned to Arnab, “Take this deer and clean up her wounds.”
Arnab looked furious as he walked towards the chital and muttered
under his breath. But as he got closer, he paused. The chital looked
at him helplessly, already having forgotten that the benefactor
walking towards her had thrown stones just moments before. [is this
stealing from elsewhere?] How forgiving, Bhanu thought, mother nature
is to her own.

Rishiji walked towards Bhanu, his dhoti and shawl dancing with the
shadows. He looked into Bhanu’s eyes without any expression and
slapped him.

Bhanu started to shake. He couldn’t stop. “What had he managed to
still do wrong?” he thought. Bhanu’s face crumpled as he backed away
and started to run. “Come back,” Rishiji said softly, but Bhanu would
not listen. He started running. He ran so he wouldn’t hear Tejas yell
or Arnab cry. He ran so he wouldn’t have to remember. He ran up the
hill to the banyan tree kneeled down, resting his face down on the
grass.

After a few moments, he wiped his eyes and turned his head and saw
chappals having appeared next to him, on top of which was Rishiji’s
shining dhoti.

“God put you in quite the situation tonight,” Rishiji said.

“How did you know I was here?” Bhanu asked, wiping his eyes.

Rishiji smiled. “Bhanu, I know what you did. And you did the right
thing. Arnab realized himself as he began to tend the chital’s words.”

“Then why did you slap me?”

“To teach you that the world may slap you even when you do something
right. A pinch on cheek may sting, but it will never be as nearly as
painful as a pinch on the soul.”

“But what about dharma and Ramayana and respecting older brothers
and-”

“These were different stories for a different time. It is your job to
write your own.”

Rishiji always spoke so simply, Bhanu thought. Or maybe this was his
way of not giving any answers and helping the boys discover things for
themselves. Just these few moments had already made Bhanu feel
lighter.

Rishiji patted Bhanu on his head. “Bholu will give you company
tonight.”

“Tejas wasn’t to upset with all the commotion was he?” Bhanu asked.

“Tejas is always upset, I wouldn’t worry about it,” Rishiji
said. “Take rest. We’ll talk more tomorrow”

Bholu stumbled beside Bhanu placing his head on Bhanu’s legs. Bhanu
scratched him behind his ears as his breathing became steadier. He
looked around and above to the many stars that burned so freely in the
dark sky. They seemed so close, hundreds of tiny stars all blessing
the ashram with their light; light that would never ask for permission
but would simply shine.

Bhanu’s breaths became long and deep and his body relaxed as the air
of the ashram gently circled and brought him into its embrace.

---

