---
layout: narrative
title: An Engagement to an Idea
author: Anshul Samar
date: 2019-04-01
mydate: April 2019
---
I had originally written this scene for Simar Malhotra’s film “Khaali
Khyaal” but we decided to keep it as a standalone one act piece and I
hope to stage it one day. The film centers around two college friends
Ayaan and Priyamvada. Ayaan is interested in Priyamvada
but just found out that she got engaged over summer vacation. What
commences is the conversation below!

Thank you, Simar, for the inspiration!

-----

A: You’re getting married. I didn't even know you were seeing
someone.

P: It's arranged. Not like arranged arranged, but we met a few times
and our families like each other. We did the roka before quarter
started.

A: What's his name?

P: It doesn’t matter

A: It doesn’t matter??!

P: Ok, Prataap Ogley.

A: Who names their son Prataap Ogley?

P: I dont know marathi people they have heavy names wadekar wakharkar
bhide ogley walley. It's like when their grandfather was deciding
their family name  he had a big modak in his mouth.

A: What does Prataap look like?

P: He kind of looks like a Modak.

A: Do you like him?

P: I mean, he's chill, nice…

A: P…

P: I mean even if I did like him my feelings for him are going to
change, These days I’ve been feeling like other things matter more
than feelings. Like commitment.

A: Oh my God

P: I’m pretty sure in DDLJ2, Simran Is going to like file for divorce,
because she realizes Raj is actually annoying in real life and their
views pretty much do not match on anything. And thanks to the divorce
stigma she's now going to spend the rest of her life feeding the
neighborhood pigeons.

A: You've bought into arranged marriage. How can you buy into arranged
marriage.

P: I mean I Still love ddlj, but sometimes I wonder if that sort of
story belongs in the movies… my mom has a point. (A looks
incredulous). Feelings change.

A: Yeah, from a crush into friendship into love.

P: And then out of friendship and out of love, don't forget out of
love.

A: Feelings matter.

P: What changes doesn't matter.

A: No, what matters doesn't change.

They laugh.

P: That's literally what I just said. look, I'm changing and he's
changing okay maybe when he's 30 and I'm 30 we may want completely
different things from life. Like maybe I will watch some saas bahu
soap and he wants to watch finance documentary. Maybe I want five kids
and he wants seven.

A: Hold up, between the two of you the minimum number of kids you’ll
have is five?!?!

P: Okay, that's a bad example. But personalities change. Marriages are
built on family and culture not people.

A:  You sound like my mom. What about all of the “my hearts not into
arranged marriage stuff” you were telling me about last year?

P: That was different, my heart’s fine, it doesn’t want my parents to
be upset and this doesn't sound so bad.

A: P, it doesn't matter what your parents think, it's your life.

P: Wow. Did you memorize that line from like the "how to destroy
relationships and be independent" handbook? Look, I'm not marrying
Prataap okay I marrying his way of life. Im marrying 3 kids, 3
generations, and 30 members of his extended family

A girl walks by and says hi to A. He puts hand in hair

P: The other upside of being engaged is unlike you I don’t have to
spend 30 minutes every day making my hair because I feel like I’m
going to bump into snow white at coupa cafe.

A: She doesn’t have to be white

They laugh.

A: And it does not take me 30 minutes every day to make my hair.

P: You use more product on your hair than I do.

A: Look. I think you’re missing out. You should be having serious fomo
right now. Like what about tinder, what about a night filled with
passion?

P: Arranged marriages are kind of like Tinder.

A: Except your mom is swiping for you

A: And group conversations include you, the person you matched with,
your mom, their mom, your uncle, their uncle,

P: ...your pundit, their pundit. Their backup pundit.

P: But besides that it’s kind of the same. The only difference is that
I use words like religion and caste to filter. And you just tinder
search for people 25 miles around Stanford.

A: Those are two very different things, I'm not close minded about
that stuff

P: And yet seeing your dating history I would bet three guest meal
swipes you are going to end up with a rich educated white girl from
Stanford. Feels a lot like a caste to me.

A: I don't filter on anything. I just want her to be kind, and
compassionate and excited about her life.

P: I look for those things too.

A: I want to feel alive when I'm with her. Like how it is right now,
so light, so fun. How do you know there's not going to be someone who
you will love to spend time with and have a great life happily ever
after? Don't you want life to be an adventure or a surprise?

P: He memorized that Ed Sheeran song to propose to me at a family
dinner. That was surprising.

pause.

P: Look I don't know. Some days I don’t want to but other days I know
he is a good man and I'm looking forward to liking him.

P: A, you're flipping a million sided coin, where each face of the
coin is a new girl that you are meeting for the first time and think
that you might fall in love with. She (point to her) is one side,
she’s another, she’s another… and every one needs a few months of dating to truly know.

A: And you are flipping a 10 sided coin where every face has been
chosen based off of their family values, education, religion, finance,
and even horoscope, who you have no idea will make you happy. Why are
you so… why do you think of life so -

P: Maybe he’s not the greatest, but at least it's a super thought
through decision. With lots of variables considered.

A: My heart is my only variable. That's why I bought you the coffee

P:  A...We’ve been through this...

A: only someone whose heart is saying otherwise spends this much time
on a Saturday afternoon trying to convince a guy that she doesn't need
to listen to her heart. Look, I don’t think you are into this Pratap
guy

P (smiling): Im engaged, A.

A: No you are not, your engaged to an idea.

P: That’s all arranged marriage is, It’s not what it used to be, at
least not for my family. It’s two people married to an idea... who
eventually fall in love.

A: Or not. My version sounds more fun.

Phone buzzes.

P: Ashi’s calling us we’re late. Oh and Renee will be there

A: Oh really?

P: Oh really what? No more interest in buying me coffee?

A: Well, you *are* engaged

