---
layout: narrative
title: Indian Weddings (for white friends)
author: Anshul Samar
date: 2016-11-01
mydate: Nov 2016
---

If you are in your mid 20s, it’s likely that your friends are getting
married. Some of those friends are brown. Some of those brown friends
are having brown weddings. And some of those brown friends having
brown weddings haven’t invited you.

It’s not your fault, you were never really close to them. But you
tried out yoga and watched Slumdog Millionaire - why not try Indian
weddings too?

When it comes to weddings, a small effort today can result in a huge
return on investment. In American weddings, one wedding gift gets you
a nice meal, some champagne, maybe one dance, and a number or two. In
Indian weddings, one wedding gift gets you at minimum five meals, two
choreographed dances, a groom on a horse, and a couple potential
fiancees (if you thought your friend was a good wing man, wait till
you meet his mother). Bond yields and stock prices will rise and fall,
but Indian weddings are here to stay.

Getting into Indian weddings can be tough, but you have diversity on
your side. Indians love seeing non Indians dance to their music. In
fact, one choreographed dance number with a white friend is required
for any successful wedding. If you choose not to dance and were never
close to the bride or groom, don’t fret. Soon, the groom’s mother will
hear that “Shashi’s wedding had 1000 attendees and drones doing the
photography,” and last minute invites will be sent to boost numbers.

If you still don’t have an invitation, crash the wedding. For those
who are brown, this part is simple. When someone asks you who you are,
say “You don’t recognize me?” and then angrily proclaim that you are
Aunt Pooja’s son.  In social settings, there are very few things that
Indians are scared of more than meeting a relative they do not
recognize.

However, since you are white, try using a distraction. If someone
approaches you, put a hand to your stomach, pretend to be sick, and
rush to the nearest restroom. “Poor kid,” they’ll say “looks like he
couldn’t tolerate the food.” If they do stop and ask for your name,
reply, “Peter. We spoke last night after the performance?” They’ll
profusely apologize and leave you to your business. If part of you
feels offended, don’t be. It can be hard to remember which white face
belongs to which white name!

If you’ve gotten this far, then pat yourself on your back. You did
it. An upset stomach aside, everything seems to be well. Enjoy the
food, music, and festivities, and don’t forget to dress nicely -
they’ll want you in the pictures.

