---
layout: narrative
title: The Marriage Game
author: Anshul Samar
date: 2017-12-02
mydate: Dec 2017
---

I’ve been playing this game with friends, siblings, and relatives and
it’s been a lot of fun - hope to hear from those who try how it went!

Time: 30 minutes.
2 players

Choose one person to be A and another to be B. The Marriage Game
proceeds in 3 phases: “Searching,” “Proposal,” and “Engagement.”

**Searching**: If you are Person A, come up with 5 attributes that
describe your ideal partner. Examples: personality traits, education,
career, income, family life, culture, religion, race, hobbies,
physical features, etc. For example, if you wish to marry a “funny
lawyer who loves travel, writing, and art” that counts as 5
attributes: funny, lawyer, likes travel, likes writing, and likes
art. Make sure these are the 5 attributes that matter most to you. In
other words, if we gathered all the people in the world that satisfy
these 5 attributes and randomly picked one person, would you be
comfortable taking whoever is chosen as your partner for life? When
you settle on your attributes, share them with Person B.

**Proposal**: If you are Person B, your job is to now to offer a marriage
proposal to Person A.  “Person A, I have a proposal here from someone
who satisfies all the qualities mentioned, but is also _____.” You can
fill in the blank with any attribute you wish. For example, “Person A,
here is a proposal for a funny lawyer who likes travel, writing, and
art but is Hindu and is dead set on never having kids.” Here, your job
is to come up with proposals that really push Person A to face
whatever preferences they have for partners, as well as their own
biases and concepts surrounding marriage, family, and gender
roles. Try to get to what matters to them and what they are willing to
give up. Don’t be afraid to challenge them and their views - consider
offering proposals from a wide range of potential partners,
i.e. people of color, varying socioeconomic statuses, twice/half the
income of partner A, with a PhD, without a college degree, someone who
doesn’t get along with your parents, another who loves you but hates
<a href="https://i.pinimg.com/736x/fd/89/f9/fd89f9b863bbcb77534d9b53faf9fa33--puppy-dog-eyes-dog-nose.jpg">dogs</a>, etc.

**Engagement**: If you are Person A, consider Person B’s proposal. True to
their word, they found someone who matches your five attributes - are
you willing to get engaged? If not, what attribute do you wish to add
and what attribute will you let go? For example, you may decide to
remove “likes art” with “open to having a family.” Share this with
Person B. Go back to Step 2 (now using the new attributes). Do this
for a total of 7 proposals.

If Person B was able to change 3 out of the 5 attributes on Person A’s
original list - Person B wins! Otherwise, Person A! Enjoy!

---

<p style="text-align: center;"> FAQ </p>

**Are any attributes off limits?**

Attributes should be within reason. Try to avoid vague catch all
attributes that get multiple attributes for free (i.e. “a good
person”). Person A could, however, choose an attribute like “goes to
the gym.” This may be correlated with other attributes like “healthy,”
“non-smoking,” or “well built.”

What to do if an argument ensues? Say Person A chooses “makes for an
all-round amazing spouse” as their attribute. Person B thinks this is
too vague. In fact, in every proposal Person B comes up with, Person A
uses the attribute to claim that because all proposals must have that
one attribute, B’s proposals are invalid.

In such a case, use the following test: for every vague attribute,
Person A should name 5 friends who have this attribute (in our
example, 5 friends who would make for all-round amazing spouses). If
they can’t, the attribute must be replaced. If they can, Person A
really ought to stop the game and introduce Person B to one of them.

During the “Proposal” phase, Person B should not pick obscure
attributes. They should only pick attributes that can plausibly appear
in a non trivial portion of the human population. For example, Person
B should not offer a proposal from a deposed dictator or a <a href="https://i.imgflip.com/1v8pjg.jpg">dog</a>.

**What about age, language, and sexual orientation? What about whether
or not I “like” them?**

You can assume that you and your future partner share at least one
common language, are of similar age, and are sexually compatible. You
can assume that you “like” them enough to be friends with them - if
you want to marry someone who you are head over heels in love with or
deeply physically attracted to, then that needs to be an attribute.

**5 variables? Picking variables which strongly correlate with others?
Attributes with lots of variance? This sounds like an optimization
problem.**

Yeah, I guess it does.

**What about finding true love?**

Feel free to play this game while you are looking for it!

**This also sounds like arranged marriage.**

In India, when a child comes of age, many families put out matrimonial
ads listing their qualities and those desired in a partner. Suitors
send pictures along with small bios. The best proposals then lead to a
face to face meeting and eventually, after days, weeks, or months:
marriage. Regardless of whether you get this sort of “arranged
marriage” or not, the first part of the process - coming up with
qualities most important to you - can be a helpful one!


